There is an amazingly silly proverb which quite mistakenly tells us that
“seeing is believing.” The most ordinary conjurer at a village
entertainment will prove the falsity of this saying. For who has not
seen one of these plausible mountebanks put a watch into a top-hat, and,
after clearly smashing it into a thousand pieces with a pestle, stir up
the disintegrated fragments with a spoon and produce an omelette? Or who
is so unacquainted with the affairs of the village schoolroom at
Christmas as not to have seen a solid billiard-ball or a lively canary
squeezed out of the side of a friend’s head? Such phenomena are by no
means rare, and occur periodically all over England. The observer’s eyes
have told him that he has seen such things, and the verb “to see” is
merely a compendious expression to indicate that on the evidence of your
eyes such or such a phenomenon has actually occurred. But no one
believes that the disintegrated watch has become an omelette though
ocular evidence--seeing--insists that it has. It was a conjuring trick.
And this leads me to the consideration of the phenomena on which this
whole book is based.

For High Alpine resorts in winter are a conjuring trick of a glorious
and luminous kind. Our commonsense, based on experience, tells us that
ice is cold, but is melted by heat; and that snow is wet; and that
unless you put on a greatcoat when the thermometer registers frost, you
will feel chilly; and that if you frequently fall down in the snow you
will be wet through, and if you do not change your clothes when you
return home you will catch a cold. All these things are quite obvious,
and he who does not grant them as premises to whatever conclusion we may
happen to base on them, is clearly not to be argued with, but soothed
and comforted like a child or taken care of like a lunatic. But High
Alpine winter resorts give, apparently, ocular disproof of all these
obvious statements, and those who go out to these delectable altitudes
in favourable seasons see (which is ocular evidence) every day and all
day the exact opposite of these primitively simple prepositions
regularly and continually taking place. They sit in the sun, when they
are tired of skating, and see that though a torrid luminary beats down
on the frozen surface, burning and browning the faces of their friends,
the ice remains perfectly dry and unmelted; they trudge through snow,
and find that they are not wet; they see the thermometer marking
anything up or down to thirty degrees of frost, and go out coatless and
very likely hatless, and are conscious only of an agreeable and bracing
warmth; they go ski-ing and all day are smothered in snow, and yet
return dry and warm and comfortable to their hotels, and do not catch
any cold whatever. Shakespeare once made an allusion of some kind (I
cannot look all through his plays to find it) about hot ice, meaning to
employ a nonsensical expression. But it is the most striking testimonial
to the magnificence of his brain that all he ever wrote meant
something, although, as in this instance, he designed it not to. For
without doubt he was alluding to what appears to occur at St. Moritz or
Mürren.

But it is all a conjuring trick, or so these altitudinists are disposed
to think when they return home to the dispiriting chills of a normal
February in England, and find that when the thermometer marks 45° or
thereabouts they shiver disconsolately in the clemming cold. Even when
they were out in Switzerland they hardly believed what appeared to be
happening, for they found that if the weather changed, and instead of
the windless calm, or a light north-wind, the Föhn-wind blew from the
south-west, warm and enervating, then, in proportion as the thermometer
mounted, they felt increasingly cold. All these things, though they
thought they saw and felt them, were of the nature of a conjuring trick,
and they never, after their return to the lowlands, really believed
them. It was obviously impossible that they could have felt warm and
dry, after being rolled in the snow. It must have been an illusion,
capable of immediate disproof if they now went out without a coat, or
sat down on a snowy London pavement. A pleasant illusion, no doubt, but
clearly an illusion. It was like the omelette emerging from the top-hat,
into which a watch had, only a moment before, been placed and pestled.

And if those who think they have experienced these phenomena, which so
clearly contradict the most elementary laws of Nature, cannot fully
believe in them when they re-enter the chilly spring of England, still
less do those who have not experienced them find it possible even to
simulate credulity when the foolish Alpinist recounts them. I rather
fancy that people who have never been to the high altitudes in winter,
believe that all those who say they have done so, and come back and tell
their friends that sun does not melt ice, and that snow is dry, and that
ten degrees of frost is an agreeable temperature to stroll about in
without a coat, are in some sort of inexplicable conspiracy. But the
conspiracy is so widely spread now, and is still spreading so fast, that
one’s remarks on the subject are received with politeness nowadays,
though still with incredulity. Some strange wandering of the wits has
taken possession of the conspirators, who are otherwise harmless. And,
such is the force with which their illusion holds them, and so anxious
are they that credence should be given to it, that they employ some sort
of skin-dye to add completeness to their strange tales, and appear with
brown hands and faces when they come back to the anæmic metropolis. They
are clearly the victims of some obscure but infectious derangement of
the brain, of which the chief symptoms are those strange illusions and
an immense appetite.... And, as I have said, the victims of these
illusions, before they have spent many days in England, are already
themselves wondering whether all these things really were so, or whether
they were but the fabric of a pleasing dream. But they make plans to
dream again about the middle of the ensuing autumn, and for the most
part find that the vision is recapturable. It is all great nonsense; but
if you take a suitable ticket at a suitable time of the year, and go
where that ticket will allow you, the nonsense is found to be recurrent.

I do not know whether ice and snow, and all the forms of the “radiant
frost,” as Shelley calls it, are in themselves more beautiful than the
spectacle, to which we are accustomed, of an unfrozen world, or whether
it is merely because we are unused to the gleams and sparkle of these
whitenesses, that we find them so entrancingly lovely. It would be
interesting, for instance, to ascertain whether an Esquimo or other
dweller in the Arctics accustomed to ice, would go into ecstasies of
admiration at the sight--shall we say--of Hyde Park Corner on a moist
warm day of September, when the roadway is swimming in a thick brown
soup of mud, and gusts of tepid rain stream on the wind-swept
lamp-posts, thus supporting the idea that it is to the novelty of the
spectacle that the arousing of our appreciation is due. Certainly it
would be hard to say that anything in the world is more beautiful than a
beech-tree in spring, or a crimson rambler in full flower, or glimpses
of the Mediterranean in a frame of grey-green olive-trees; and I am
inclined to believe that it is partly the contrast which a sunny morning
in winter among the High Alps presents to all that a Londoner has known
or dreamed of hitherto that partly accounts for the ineffable
impressions it never fails in producing on him. And to that we must add
the exhilarating and invigorating effect of the still dry air, and the
sun that all day pours Pactolus over the gleaming fields. In such an air
and in such a flood of light all our senses and perceptions are
quickened, the vitality of our organs is increased, and with the
wonderful feeling of _bien-être_ which the conditions give, our
appreciation is kindled too. I always feel that it _must_ have been on a
frosty morning that David said: “I opened my mouth and drew in my
breath.” And perhaps on that day the cedars of Lebanon were covered with
the crystals of hoar-frost, and below the snowy uplands the dim blue of
the sea slept insapphirined at the bases of the shining cliffs....

I lick the chops of memory, and go back in thought to the middle of
December, when, having previously determined not to go abroad till
January, I hurriedly fly the country, like a criminal seeking to escape
from the justice that is hot on the heels of a murderer. In such wise do
I fly from my conscience--conscience, I may remark, is one of the things
that everybody leaves behind when he goes to the High Alps: apparently
it and other poisonous organisms, such as the bacillus of tuberculosis
cannot exist in those altitudes--while below my breath I again register
the frequently broken vow that I will be at home again by the middle of
January at the latest. For indeed it seems impossible to tolerate London
any longer just now: the fogs have begun (these are the excuses with
which I seek to stay the protests of conscience, before I fly from it),
and for three days last week we lived in a thick and ominous twilight of
dusky orange, tasting evilly of soot and sulphurous products. At
intervals a copper-coloured plate showed itself above the house roofs:
and, oh, to think that this mean metallic circle was indeed none other
than the hot radiant giant that in the happier climes was rejoicing to
run his course across the turquoise expanse of cloudless sky; that this
remote and meaningless object was the same that sparkled on dazzling
peak and precipice and turned the untrodden snows to sheets of diamond
dust. Then after three days of Stygian gloom the fog was dispersed by a
shrewd and shrill north wind, and for a whole morning snow fell heavily,
which, as it touched the pavements and roadways of town more than
usually befouled by the fog, turned into a base and degrading substance
resembling melting coffee-ice. The streets swam in the icy treacle of
it, and motor-buses and other ponderous vehicles cast undesired helpings
of it at the legs of foot-passengers. After this dispiriting day the
weather changed again and a tepid south-westerly gale squealed through
the streets. This was too much: I bought a quantity of what is known as
sermon-paper and two new stylographs (this was another sop to
conscience, and implied the intention of working out in Switzerland),
made a few hasty and craven arrangements on the telephone, and slid out
of Charing Cross Station at 2.20 P.M. precisely next day, leaving
conscience, like an abandoned wife, sobbing on the platform.

Now, while journeys, whether on land or sea, are apt to be but tiresome
businesses when they are undertaken at the call of some tedious errand,
they are vastly different affairs when they conduct the traveller to
joyful places and delectable pursuits. They are coloured by that which
awaits him at the end of them (like the sweetness of sugar permeating
tea), and this particular progress is to me full of romantic happenings.
Dusk is already closing in before I reach the coast, and as the train
halts on the hill above Folkestone, before being towed backwards down to
the harbour, I can see the lights beginning to twinkle in the town and
along the pier, which is surrounded by the great grey immensity of the
wave-flecked sea. A fine rain is falling dismally, and as I hurry across
the slippery quay I am weighed down by an enormous greatcoat (the
pockets of which, I am sorry to say, are “salted” by various packets of
cigarettes, which is why I wear it), and I stagger under the weight of a
suit-case, sooner than part with which I would die. For the French or
Swiss railway companies often (no doubt with humorous intent) arrange
that the traveller’s large luggage shall not arrive for twenty-four
hours or so after he has got to his destination, and in less experienced
years I have packed my boots and skates in these detained trunks, and
have been obliged to wait in savage inaction till the railway company
has come to the end of its joke, just as one waits for the end of a long
funny story. Not so now: my inseparable bag contains my large and
cumbrous skate-shod boots as a first charge, and after they have been
stowed, the mere necessities of life, like clothes and dressing-case, as
opposed to its joys, fill the rest. Even in the harbour the steamer
sways with the back-wash of the heavy seas outside, and the
mooring-ropes squeak and strain to its unease. I stick in the narrow
gang-plank that conducts in precipitous incline to the deck (at least
the corner of my suit-case does, which is part of my identity); a faint
and awful smell of red plush sofas and cold beef comes up from the
stairs leading to the saloon; the tarpaulins, rigged up along the open
passage between decks, flap uneasily and are buffeted by the rain-soaked
wind, and sailors hurry about with white japanned tin objects in their
hands....

All this sounds dismal and dispiriting enough, but such incidents, I
repeat, take their colour from that to which they lead the traveller,
and when bound for Switzerland they are all haloed in a vague
pleasurable sense of excitement and romance. We put out on the turbulent
and windy sea, and as we round the end of the pier the whole boat
shivers as a great white-headed wave strikes her. It is cold and wet on
deck, but I have to linger there while the cliffs of my beloved native
land vanish into the grey of the swift on-coming night, and feel a
perfect glow of enthusiasm at the idea of not setting eyes on them again
for another month or so (probably “so”: because conscience is now far
away, perhaps still waiting at Charing Cross Station, in case I return
by the next train), and already I am beginning to be doubtful whether I
really made a vow to be back by the middle of January. I pass rows of
silent figures with closed eyes reclining on deck-chairs in the more
sheltered corners: then the whole ship makes a scooping curtsey into the
trough of a wave, and the water pours sonorously on to the deck. Shrill
whistles the wind in the rigging, and a raucous steam-siren proclaims to
all the traffic in the Channel that we are off to Switzerland to skate,
having left our consciences and the white cliffs of England behind us,
and not caring two straws, at this delightful moment, as to whether we
ever see any of them again.

I love the landing on the friendly shores of France, the waiting while
the ship is reluctantly coaxed sidling up to the pier, the hustle to get
through the custom-house and enter the warm, well-lit train. The foreign
tongue is delightful to the ear: so, too, to the eye, the blue-bloused
porters, and the unplatformed station, where the huge carriages tower
high above one, emitting mysterious jets of steam. All is strange and
new and delightful: the engine of unaccustomed build and outlandish
voice, the grey upholstered compartments with their hot-carpeted floors,
the restaurant car with bottle-filled racks, where presently I sit, part
of a moving pageant of eating and drinking, as we shriek through
stations and scour with ever-increasing velocity through the darkness of
a stormy night. At Laon mysterious jugglings take place: another string
of carriages is slowly shunted on to our train, to the accompaniment of
many cries of warning and encouragement and wavings of lanterns, and the
buffers come home with a soft thud. We cast off our tail, lizard-like,
which is hauled away to travel divergently to Basle, and soon we are
thundering on again by the more direct route to Berne. At some timeless
hour a long halt is made, and compartment doors are flung open with the
sonorous proclamation of the arrival of _les messieurs de la douane_.
Enter _les messieurs_, and at their sesame bags fly open, and with
strange staves they explore the hidden recesses under the seats, in
their nightly search for laces and spirits and cigarettes and all the
contraband of peace. Soon this complimentary visit is over, the green
shades are adjusted again over the lamps, and the vibration and rhythm
of the racing wheels mingle and blend themselves into the blurred edges
of dream....

I do not wake until we are actually slowing down to enter Berne--that
city so justly famous for its bears, its President of this delectable
republic, and its terrace from which the eager tourist vainly scans the
impenetrable clouds which invariably screen from his view all possible
glimpses of the mountains of the Oberland. Whenever I arrive at Berne it
is always a grey chilly morning, just above freezing point, so that the
icy streets are half slush. At first this used to depress me with
ominous forebodings of a thaw at the higher altitudes: now I know that
all the winter through it is always just thawing at Berne, and that the
sky there always is heavily be-clouded. I think a sunny frosty morning
there would cause me some considerable anxiety, for it would imply a
complete upset of climatic conditions, and midsummer might be expected
to hold its abhorred sway on the heights. So in perfect equanimity I
climb back again into our train--heated to the temperature of the second
hottest room in a Turkish bath--and we jog in more leisurely fashion
through the half-frozen villages towards the lake of Thun. These
villages are mainly composed of houses taken from the larger-sized boxes
of toys, with stones fastened down on their wood-shingle eaves to
prevent their roofs blowing away, and with staircases, clearly built for
ornament, and completely unpractical, climbing up the outside of their
walls. Stations and banks and hotels seem to be constructed with a view
to moderate permanence; the rest are clearly so made that they can be
taken up and planted down somewhere else. Then as we emerge on to the
edges of the lake, higher hills begin to tower across its steely-grey
levels, and rifts in the clouds that shroud their heads and hunched
shoulders show glimpses of sun that shine on the whiteness of snow. Mile
after mile we pursue a meandering way along the shores, and thread the
darkness of hoarse tunnels, whose lips are fringed with dripping
icicles, and the sense of something coming, something high and clear,
begins to grow. Though in front, where Interlaken lies, a veil of
grey-blue mist is interspersed between us and that which, I know, soars
above it, the clouds are beginning on all sides to become unravelled
like wool-work pulled out, and through the rents and torn edges gleams
of turquoise sky are seen. High up climb serrated rims of rock, cut
vividly clear against the blue and fringed with aspiring pines; higher
yet, where the boldest of these brave vegetables can find no footing,
further ridges appear austere and empty and gleaming. Yet these are but
the outlying buttresses and ramparts of the great towers at the base of
which they lean and cluster: to-night we shall sleep in an eyrie far
above them, and far above us yet will watch the unscaled precipices of
the great range, over the edge of which the unheeding stars climb and
swim into sight all night long, pouring the golden dew of their shining
upon forest and glacier, until the snows are rosy with dawn.

We paused in Interlaken Central Station to draw breath after our
lake-side amble. Here the snow lay crisp and hard-trodden in the
streets, but overhead the gutters gurgled and the eaves of houses
dripped with its melting in this brilliant morning. No shred of cloud
was left in all the shining heavens, and like the flanks of a galloped
horse the pine-clad hillsides steamed in the sun.... And then the
miracle.... As we steamed forth again to the Eastern station, a long
valley lying between two wooded hills opened out, and there, clear in
the light of the young day, and white with virgin snows and blue with
precipices of ice, and set in the illimitable azure, rose the Queen of
Mountains, the maiden, the Jungfrau, peaked and domed and pinnacled in
ineffable crystal.

The Jungfrau is and will always be my mistress among mountains, as she
was when I first saw her at the age of twelve. One mistake I have made
in my conduct towards her, and that was ten years later when I climbed
her--and yet who could tell she would prove so tedious and heavy (not in
hand but in foot)? For I approached the lady of my adoration from the
Concordia hut, and instead of feasting my eyes at every step on her
queenly gracious carriage and maiden slenderness, I found that the
closer I got to her the more did she appear round-shouldered, not to say
hump-backed. In addition, a quantity of fresh snow had fallen, and we
had a long tiresome and utterly unexciting trudge, a hot and stodgy
affair. I had imagined that ventures and perils would have to be
encountered for this wooing and winning of her, with balancings and
poisings on stairways of precipitous ice and needles of pinnacled rock:
instead she had to be solidly and laboriously and dully approached; it
was like wooing some great bolster or gigantic cow. For a little while
after that I cared nothing for her; she was a mature and silent barmaid
of vast proportions, but gradually her charm and enchantment cast their
spell over me again, the dissolution of which I intend never to risk in
the future, unless I approach her by a more hazardous and daring route.
To those who approach her dully, she gives herself dully: the more
daring wooer she may perhaps kill, but she does not bore him.

But the wonder of her, when seen through clear air with the brilliant
winter sky around her head from the entrance to this valley that leads
up to Lauterbrunnen! Up it we steamed in a little angry rattling
snorting train, which cut itself in half to take some of its aspiring
contents to Grindelwald on the left, and others among whom I numbered
myself to Wengen and to Mürren. By the side of our way ran a turbulent
mountain stream fed by the glaciers of the Oberland, too swift to freeze
altogether, but with its backwaters and sheltered reaches covered over
with lids of ice. For all its glacier-birth steam rose from it in the
icy air that hovered in shaded places, and the alders and hazels that
hung over it were thickly encrusted with the marvellous jewellery of
the hoar-frost, spiked and _parsemès_ and refoliaged in wondrous winter
growth with tendrils and scrolls of minutest diamond-dust. Narrower grew
the valley, steeper and taller the wooded hills that overhung it till at
last we reached Lauterbrunnen, close to which the Staubbach, most
amazing of all waterfalls, leaps a clear eight hundred feet from the
edge of the high plateau-shelf, which skirts along the mountain-side on
to the rocks below. Even in summer, when the melting of the snows that
feed the stream make it of far greater volume than when the stricture of
frost is on it, the water, poured as from a jug-spout, disintegrates in
its fall, so that it reaches the valley more in wreaths of mist than in
solid water, and collects again from the dripping rocks; while in winter
its diminished volume is further spent in the manufacture of the huge
icicles that fringe the edge of its leaping-place, and hang in great
streamers, the beard and hair, you would say, of the very Frost-king
himself, who sits at ease on this precipitous throne. Little water
to-day runs away from where the clouds of mist and water-smoke fall on
the rocks, for most of them are frozen there, and a layer of ice covers
the boulders where they come to earth. For here, so engorged lies the
valley, so close to the great rampart of the Oberland, that the sun
which blazed on Interlaken has not yet surmounted the barrier of
mountain-peaks.

Parallel with the Staubbach, and up a hillside which appears hardly less
sheer than the precipice itself, runs the funicular railway which leads
to the Mürren-plateau. At first sight it seems as if it must be meant
for a practical joke, constructed by humorous engineers to astonish the
weak minds of travellers, and, though practical from the point of view
of a joke, to be perfectly impracticable as a means of conveyance. Its
steepness is that of disordered images seen in a dream, and it was with
a sense of utter incredulity that I first took my place in one of the
small wooden compartments and was locked in by an apparently sane and
serious conductor. He blew a whistle, or a bell sounded, just as is done
on real lines of traffic, and immediately afterwards we began to ascend
that impossible line of rails, sauntering with smooth and steady
progress up that ridiculous precipice. More amazing still we soon
observed a similar car sauntering steadily down it, just strolling down,
even as we were strolling up. We met, we passed, and I had a vision of
passengers smoking and chatting, as if nothing in the least remarkable
was happening and imminent death did not await us all....

But more remarkable things than that were happening. Upwards from the
valley we climbed on this Jacob’s ladder that reached if not to Heaven,
to very heavenly places. Pine woods and rocks melted away below,
streaming quietly downwards; presently we were level with the top of the
towering precipice from which the Staubbach was discharged, and
presently that too was left below. But higher as we mounted there
climbed with us, in fresh unfoldings of glaciers and peaks and
glittering snow fields, the great range of the Oberland. New peaks “met
Heaven in snow,” new _arêtes_, too steep and wind-swept to allow a
vestige of snow to lie there pointed arrow-like to the tops above them.
Eiger, Monch, Silberhorn, and Jungfrau towered glittering just across
the Lauterbrunnen valley from which we had come, and as we sidled along
the upland shelf on which Mürren stands, gradually the whole range
spread itself out in tremendous rampart, radiant, rejoicing, and
austere. For foreground was this narrow ledge of white fields dotted
here and there with cattle-châlets, and pines scattered singly or in
companies, all wearing plumes and tippets of snow that made their
foliage seem a black blot in the sunlight, and soon the congregation of
village roofs appeared, and Mürren stood bathed and basking in sunshine,
drowned, so to speak, in the sparkling champagne of the invigorating
winter morning. And the intoxication of the high places, an entrancing
vintage of oxygen and ice and sun, invaded limb and sinew and brain.

It is supposed by those who have never seen the infinite variety of
forms into which frost converts mist and dew and all manner of water,
that there must be a monotony in those vast expanses of snow and ice.
They figure to themselves the depressing spectacle of snow as it usually
appears in England, smooth and soft and wet, and too close a cousin to
slush not to be tainted with a family resemblance; the image called up
by ice is a grey surface in which are imbedded dead leaves, twigs and
stones thrown on to it by boys for purposes not clearly understandable,
while all they know of hoar-frost is an evanescent decoration that
occurs at the edges of ditches and on lawns when tea is being made in
the morning and disappears as soon as the poached eggs, leaving the
grass soaked and dripping. But as is crystal to soap so are those
radiant congelations of the High Alps to the same as seen beneath grey
skies and unluminous days. Here, if snow has fallen, as sometimes
happens, while wind is blowing, it is driven into all manner of curving
wave crests and undulations; then when the fall is over, the sky clears
again, a night of frost hardens and congeals the outlines, and the trees
wear fine feathers and plumes of whiteness. As the snowfall packs with
its own weight, there grows on the surface of the fields a crust half
snow, half ice, covered with dazzling minute crystals. During the fall
of the snow there has been moisture in the air, and often on that
brilliant morning that succeeds the fall, the air is full of minute
frozen particles of water that sparkle like the old-fashioned
glass-decoration on Christmas cards, so that one walks through a shining
company of tiniest diamond fire-flies. And the frozen surface of snow
reflects the wonderful azure and gold of sun and sky, and here in the
blaze it lies white beneath a vivid yellow, there in the shade a dim
blue permeates it. After a few days of hot sun more of the fall will
have melted and slipped from the trees, and they stand black-foliaged
and red-trunked waiting for the decoration of the hoar-frost. The one
more night of frost covers every sprig and fir-needle with amazing
spikes and fernlike sprays of minute crystal. Wondrous are their
growths, more particularly if, as sometimes happens, some cold mist
comes up from the valleys. Then with a craze for decoration almost
ludicrous, you shall see your friends with hair and eyebrows bedecked
with these jewels, each separate hair wearing its frozen garniture, and
their coats and stockings ornamented in like manner. They grow white in
a single minute almost; and such as have moustaches, close to the
moisture of their breath will suddenly turn to walruses with long
dependence of icicles. And yet--here is a conjuring trick again--though
ice and frost frame their faces they are conscious of no cold at all.

Marvellous, too, are the dealings of the frost with the running streams
and the lakes such as those at St. Moritz or Davos or Sils. Often,
unfortunately, it happens that a snowfall will occur when they are but
lightly frozen over, in which case the snow quite covers them, breaks
through perhaps in places, and with the ice already formed, makes a
rough uneven surface useless to the skater, and to the beholder no more
than a level snow-field, with perhaps ugly stains on it where the water
has come through and formed the grey ice, which is of no artistic
moment. But sometimes it happens that a snowfall occurs before any ice
has formed on the lake, and thus, though it lies on the surrounding
ground, it melts in the water, and at the end of the fall the lake is
still unfrozen, though the winter mantle lies over field and wood. Then
let us suppose there comes a hard frost with no more snow. Night after
night ice absolutely clear like glass forms on the water and gradually
thickens. If the days are windless it is entirely smooth, and
practically invisible, so that it is impossible to believe that you are
not looking on a sheet of water. Then the glad word goes forth that the
lake bears, and you hurry forth to skate on it. But mountain and wood
and landscape are all mirrored in it as in perfectly still water, and it
is almost incredible that here is ice a foot or two thick. Tremblingly
you launch yourself on it, scarcely able to believe in its solidity; for
through that unwavering surface you see every weed and stump under
water. The very fishes flit and flick visibly below your feet, and so
glassy is it that through it it is possible to see the subaqueous
foundations of the lacustrine dwellings in the lake of Sils, never to be
seen unless the lake is frozen, since the slightest ripple of the water
sets the surface a-quiver and mars its translucency. But seen through
this foot or so of perfectly clear ice--black ice, as it is called--it
is as if one looked through that charming contrivance called the
bathyscope, by which you can observe the depths of the sea. Below the
ice, the water lies still and in a calm sheltered by this solid ceiling
of crystal, and you see, as if in an aquarium, the fishes and the
water-weeds, and all the gales that ever blew will not shatter the
reflections or obscure the depths. Then when your courage has come to
you, and you begin to grasp the fact that an army might march across
this invisible plain of ice without breaking through, you will no doubt
venture forth from the shore, and feel what you never feel on rinks and
other prepared surfaces of ice, the divine elasticity of your floor. And
very likely just when you are some half-mile from the shore, you will be
terror-stricken to hear a crack as of artillery resound close to you,
and a great crack will zigzag like lightning through the ice. The first
time you hear that, the present writer is willing to wager any
reasonable sum that your face will blanch (unless too sun-tanned) and
you will skate with incredible celerity for the nearest land. But that
salvo portends no danger whatever, except if your skate-blade enters
such a crack (of which there will be, unfortunately, a considerable
number in the course of a few days) longitudinally. Then it is true you
may have a fall, but these explosions do not mean that you will ever be
food for fishes.

But after a few days, in all probability, even though no snow falls, the
surface of the ice, except where it is kept swept, becomes useless for
skating, thanks to another of the wonderful conjuring tricks of the
frost. Owing to dew, or from other moisture in the air, there begin to
form upon the ice little nuclei of hoar-frost such as are seen in Plate
VI. They look harmless enough, and with perfect justice you admire
their exquisite fanlike fronds, and think no more of them. But in a
couple of days the same surface, as shown from the identical point of
view in Plate VII, presents a totally different aspect, and one which is
clearly discouraging to the most ardent of skaters. But then, since you
are finally and completely and irrevocably thwarted in any ambition to
skate on this depressing surface (for it is as if all the ice-moles in
the world had made their common earth there, multiplying exceedingly),
you will be wise to examine and admire the astounding forms of this
fairy frost-work before it becomes confluent, and, losing the
individuality of its separate tufts, covers the whole lake like powdery
snow. In Plate VIII you may see the marvellous delicacy in detail of
these bouquets of frost-flowers, and the same on larger scale in Plate
IX, where they are already becoming a very jungle of anti-tropical
growth.

In that wonderful poem “By the Fireside,” Robert Browning, in speaking
of the Alps in autumn, says:

And that which he weds to such lovely language is another of the spells
which the circle of the Alpine day and night weaves round us. Only, I
think, in winter the silence which he speaks of at evening, or, he might
have added at night, is a thing incredible to those who, I may almost
say, have never heard that silence. In spring or summer or autumn it is
broken by sounds of cowbells perhaps, and, almost certainly by a murmur
of wind in pine-woods, or of water hurrying from the heights. But in
winter, on a still evening those evidences of life are dumb, and yet the
silence itself is pregnant with vitality. At sunset the high tops burn
in rose-coloured flame, and as the glory fades into the toneless velvet
of the frosty sky, the stars in their wheeling are of a brilliance
utterly unknown to lower altitudes, except perhaps where the desert lies
fallow and dry beneath Egyptian skies, and no emanation from the earth
dims the burning of these “patins of bright gold.” But that “quiring to
the bright-eyed Seraphim” reaches not the mortal ear, and at evening or
at night in these High Alps, there is felt, as it were, that ecstasy of
silence that seems on the point of bursting into chorus: “it must get
rid of what it knows.” Nowhere else have I felt so rapturous a quality
of stillness: the frozen snow lies taut under the grip of the immense
energy of the frost: no avalanches slipping from the snow-laden flanks
of the Jungfrau under the hot beams of the sun, startle the valley with
sonorous thunder: the wind stirs not the lightest needle of the pines;
the villagers are home from the frozen fields, and doors are shut.
Slowly the last rose-colour fades from the peaks, and the stars
brighten, and you hold your breath to hear the most wonderful thing you
have ever heard--utter stillness, that yet is strained almost to
bursting point with the energies that make it, the peace that passes
understanding that lies above the snow and beneath the stars....

Something has already been said about the swift-growing jungles of
frost-flowers that so speedily cause the lakes in Switzerland to be
utterly useless for all purposes connected with skates. It suddenly
strikes the writer that the inexperienced in these matters will have
concluded that I mean that when once those frost-flowers have formed all
skating is over, and that if they have gone to Switzerland for the
indulgence of this taste, all that is henceforth to be offered them is
the opportunity to admire this frozen vegetation instead of cutting
figures. I therefore hasten to assure them that lake skating in
Switzerland _does not count_; indeed most winter resorts have no lake at
all; and even if they have, skating there is quite the exception and not
the rule. In nine cases out of ten the snow spoils the ice before it
bears, and the frost-flowers spoil the greater part of it, even if the
snow has held off, almost immediately afterwards. Lake-skating, in fact,
is of the nature of a bonus rather than a dividend: to be enjoyed if it
happens, but by no means to be reckoned on.

But at every Swiss resort there are rinks made, which render the skater
independent of natural surfaces of ice, and those, at all well-conducted
places, are “new every morning,” because every evening they are swept
and sprinkled with water, which by the ensuing day has frozen, and
presents a fresh surface to the zealot. In fact, an artificial
skating-rink is as necessary an equipment in the Swiss winter resort as
is the hotel itself. The construction and renovation of these rinks is
most interesting, and ranks among the fine arts, just as does the
architecture of a fine golf-links or the preparation of good wickets.
These rinks are used for two purposes: skating, including bandy or ice
hockey, and curling. I do not count ice-gymkhanas or ice-carnivals,
because anything is good enough for them. You can play the shovel-game
or crawl through barrels among the jungles of frost-flowers. I do not
imply that such entertainment is not exceedingly amusing; I only mean
that the artist in rink-making paints his masterpieces primarily for the
sake of the skater and the curler, not for the Pierrot with his Chinese
lantern, or those who win three-legged races.

The technique of these ice-pictures is in brief as follows:

In the beginning of the creation (from the skater’s point of view) a
piece of ground is carefully and accurately levelled. This, if it is to
be the foundation of a well-and truly-laid rink in the ensuing winter,
should be done early in the spring, because the ground will have then
had time to settle down, and the inequalities which always occur in this
settling can be made good, before the first frosts of the autumn begin,
and the soil gets fixed and frozen. Also, so I am told, the fact that
the ground will then be covered with a growth of weeds and grasses,
causes the foundation of the rink to be of better quality. This is
easily understandable: the base is matted, and is probably more coherent
in texture and less liable to contain holes through which the water may
drain away. Then, when the whole ground has been doctored, _i.e._ when
the small inequalities have been corrected and it is as uniformly level
as can be expected of anything in this shifting world, everybody sits
down and smokes (as is the habit of the Swiss peasant) till the first
good snowfall comes, probably in November or early in December. Then the
merry peasant has to put down his pipe and work begins again.

A row of them (I am describing the most up-to-date method) stand close
together with arms interlocked, in as straight a line as may be, and
trample down all this beautiful fresh snow. Up and down they go, in slow
time, stamping heavily with their great feet, and making out of perhaps
a foot of snow some 3 or 4 inches at the most, of really compact and
hard foundation. It will resemble at the best, as regards evenness, a
lane over which flocks of ponderous sheep have passed; but the
groundwork (this is the main point) will be of hardened snow, though
extremely rough of surface. Then they may all sit down and smoke their
pipes again--all, that is, except the headman and those who pull about,
at his bidding, the yards of hose which at one end terminate in a brass
nozzle, at the other in the water-supply, which should run in the main
at high pressure. This water is then turned on to the compacted snow
which gets soaked with it, and, if a few nights of hard frost follow the
original snowfall, becomes gradually converted into a sort of rough but
glazed and solid ice. Then, if nothing untoward happens, in the shape of
thaw or further snowfall, the next step is taken. But if there is during
these few days a thaw, they have to wait for more snow to fall, and do
their trampling over again; while if there is more snow, the poor
wretches have still to trample and get the foundations firm again. But
if all goes well--and the experienced iceman will delay the original
trampling until the barometer or his weather-sense (preferably the
former) promises cold weather to follow--he makes his second operation.
He will have built a small bank of snow perhaps 3 feet high and
well-spaded down, round his rink, and have sprinkled that as well as his
rink surface, so that it is at any rate glazed with ice and water-tight.
Then, waiting for a bright sunny morning, he floods the whole rink with
perhaps 2 inches of water. The sunniness of the day is most important
for this operation: if he put on this flood on a cold day, or at evening
when a frosty night was imminent, all the water he put on, lying on the
cold frozen surface below, and with the frosty air above it would freeze
solid without cohering to the original frozen foundation. But putting it
on while the sun is hot, the top surface of the foundation is percolated
with the flood, and when the frost of the night follows, the flood binds
with it. One night possibly may not consolidate the flood: if it does
not, he waits till another night completes the work. All the time, it
must be remembered, the rink presents the most depressing appearance:
little bits of frozen snow have floated up to the surface, frost-flowers
perhaps have made their ill-starred appearance, and it still somewhat
resembles a sheep-trampled lane. But then things begin to look better:
and another inch of water is put on, and then another inch, and then
another, each being consolidated before the next is applied, and each
being applied not in the evening, but when the sun will slightly melt
the previous surface. With each of these floodings the ice grows more
desirably smooth, and more immaculately clean, till at the end of
perhaps a fortnight there is something like 18 inches of solid ice over
the ground that was levelled in the spring. At least this thickness is
required if the ice is to last properly, for even in mid-winter the most
sickening series of climatic catastrophes may occur, which, unless there
is good thickness of ice originally built up, may spoil the rink
altogether. For on hot sunny days, though the surface of the ice remains
quite dry, very great evaporation occurs, and the dryness of the air
drinks up the melted ice before it visibly or tangibly becomes water. Or
again, even in the most well-conducted winters, at the most approved
resorts, there may be a complete thaw, and “the pools are filled with
water,” which also evaporates. In both these cases, there is a
consequent loss of ice, and the bullion, so to speak, must be able to
stand the drain upon it. Still worse, there may be a snowfall followed
by a thaw, followed by a frost. The thaw has eaten into the ice; the
frost has caused this rodent mixture to get encrusted again. And then,
if there is not good depth of ice, the most excruciating events tread on
each others’ heels. The ground below the thin ice is warmed with the
penetrating sun, and begins to exude bubbles; the bubbles rise, and
horrible water-blisters, skinned over with ice, appear. The skates crash
through them (“and langwedge which I will not pollewt my pen with
describing,” as Miss Fanny Squeers said) and cut into the half-frozen
ground, which thereupon begins to leak. The most awful mess ... there
are no words for it. Therefore it is necessary, as soon as possible, to
get a good thickness of ice.

But this building-up of the rink requires immense patience and
forethought. Night after night when the building is going on, and the
weather is warm and beastly, the head iceman, if he is really competent,
will sit up through the long tale of dark hours, keeping himself awake
with coffee, and watching the thermometer to see when it registers
sufficient degrees of frost to enable him to put more water on to the
ice. He will wait all through a cloudy night, hoping for the sky to
clear, in order to get a half inch more foundation. It is useless and
worse than useless to apply more water unless there are several degrees
of frost, for this only weakens his original trampled foundation of
snow, and leads to the awful trouble of blisters coming up from the
ground. But if even an hour or two before daybreak the temperature
sinks, and there is a chance of gaining a further thickness of ice, he
will rouse his men, and at any rate spray or sprinkle the whole surface
of the rink, in order to get a little more ice, just a little more.
Night and day, like a mother over a sick child (I am not exaggerating),
a man like Rudolf Baumann, and others not so well known to me, will
watch over their rink, to console, to fill up holes, to add another
fibre of underlying muscle.

But even when a couple of feet of solid ice are built up over the
ground, the trouble of the iceman is not over. Again a snowfall may
come, followed by a thaw, and the removal of this reveals sometimes a
terrible sort of chicken-pox on the ice. If the snowfall is followed by
cold weather, not much harm is done, for the snow is removed by shovels
and barrows, and a sprinkle of water over the whole rink--sprinklings
being made at night, since a sprinkle freezes almost as it falls,
opposed to the slower habits of a flood--shows next day that the rink is
no whit the worse. But if a thaw follows a snowfall, the general laws of
nature are suspended, in order to thwart icemen and skaters.
Theoretically, the surface of the ice below the melting snow will thaw
evenly. Practically, it does nothing of the kind. The surface is
unaffected in one spot, and immediately adjoining it has thawed into a
small round hole about 6 inches in circumference. Why this happens I
cannot say, except that it is part of the general malignity of natural
law; but the effect is apparent enough, and when the thawing snow is
removed, the ice is found to be covered by numberless small holes. Each
one of these has to be filled up by hand, with a freezing mixture of
snow and water, or better of pounded ice and water.... There are rinks
in Switzerland 300 yards long--I leave the consideration of these, in
the matter of labour required, to mathematicians who like dealing with
progressions that approach the infinite.

Now the shrinkage of the ice already gained goes on all winter long,
owing to the evaporation of the surface, and owing to the cutting edges
of skates, which cover it with a sawdust of frozen stuff that has to be
swept off every evening. This perpetual loss must be made good, or else
the rink would soon vanish altogether, and it is made good by floodings
or sprinklings. A flood of a couple of inches over the whole surface is
of course the easiest way of doing this, but it is far the least
satisfactory. For, as I have said, the flood must be put on while the
sun is still on the ice, to enable it to bind into the ice already
formed, and thus hours of daylight are lost to the skater. Furthermore,
unless a really severe night follows, it will not be all properly
frozen. So the good ice-maker, instead of turning skaters off the ice,
and getting by one flood sufficient thickness to last for three or four
days more, sprinkles instead. This is a far longer and more troublesome
process, for with his hose-pipe with its small nozzle he has to go over
the ice again and again, six or seven times perhaps, or more, in a
single night, if ice is badly wanted. If it is freezing hard, each
sprinkle will solidify almost as soon as it falls, and sometimes he
sprinkles all night long; while if it is far too warm for a flood to
have a chance of solidifying, he will, unless a real thaw is going on,
still find it possible to sprinkle once or twice before morning, even
though there is but a degree or two of frost. Another immense advantage
that sprinkling has over flooding is, that ice thus made, little by
little, in exceedingly thin layers, lasts, for some reason, far longer
than a greater thickness of ice frozen solid in a single night. Why this
should be so, I do not know; but the fact is incontestable. Certainly
also a flood of a couple of inches frozen solid is far more brittle in
itself than ice built up in thin layers, and an awkward toe-strike with
the tip of the skate will cut a great chunk out of flood-ice, whereas it
makes far less impression on sprinkled ice. The sprinkle should be
thrown far and high (as illustrated in Plate XIII), so that it comes
down on to the ice in fine mist-like rain that freezes quickly and
freezes tightly into the ice already there. Of course all these
difficulties are not encountered in a perfectly cold winter. Given a
hard frost every night, it is easy to keep pace with the daily
evaporation. But even in the loftiest winter resorts in this excellent
republic, mid-winter thaws occur.

Such in brief is the making of these rinks that seem such simple affairs
when made, just a level piece of ice with a smooth surface. But the
knowledge, the care, the watchfulness which are necessary to secure
good ice that will last all winter and reasonably resist any thaws and
snowfalls that may occur, are enormous. And the same care that is
lavished on their making must be expended on their keeping. No one with
soil on his gouties or a cigarette even in his mouth should be allowed
on the sacred surface, for even a feathery ash of tobacco if allowed to
lie on the ice will get warmed by the sun and gradually melt its way
into the ice. The sprinkle that night covers it, and it is embedded in
the ice like a fly in amber. Again the sun shines on it, it melts a
little water round it, and forms the nucleus of what will spread into a
blister in the ice. Any dirt in the same way makes similar holes, and
nothing but the clean skate-blade and the necessary and privileged boots
of the icemen should ever be allowed on the rink. How amazed would be
the pioneers of outdoor artificial rinks if they could see the huge and
perfect surfaces now yearly prepared for the hordes of foreign visitors
who flock to Switzerland. Of those pioneers John Addington Symonds was
one, and in his charming essays he recounts how at Davos he and a few
enthusiastic friends took exercise by incessantly working the handle of
a pump that stood in the middle of a level field, until, I think, the
pump froze. Then greatly daring they proceeded to skate over the amazing
ridges and shelves of ice which must certainly have been the result of
this hardy undertaking. Nowadays a reservoir must be built at a
sufficient height above the rink to secure a good pressure of water
for the sprinkling, and patient laudable men sit up all night
watching the thermometer to see if it is safe to offer water to the
delicately-nurtured crystal. But from these fine-art rinks has fine-art
skating been evolved, and if the pioneers of rink-making wondered at
our reservoir, our cohorts of workmen, our huge glassy surfaces, still
more perhaps would the skaters of those days be astonished to see some
champion of the Continental execute his “back loop change loop eight”
laying the loops on top of the other, or observe four gentlemen of the
English swoop down at top speed and on back edges to their centre, flick
out four creamy rockers and glide away again to their appointed
circumference. So much then for the skater’s material needs; we pass on
to consider the use he puts them to.

Now there are two styles of skating (I do not refer to good skating and
bad skating), known respectively as the English and the Continental or
International. In past days, certain exponents of one or the other
school, with the mistaken idea that to belittle another was to magnify
themselves, fell into the stupid error of comparing the two to the
accompaniment of robust vilifications of that style which happened not
to be so fortunate as to number them among its adherents. But it is no
exaggeration to say that the two styles have nothing whatever to do with
one another. It is true that the performer in each case is on skates,
and that the skates progress over ice; but the very skates are
different; so, too, is the whole mode, manner, style, and effect of
performance, and it would be as reasonable for the Rugby football player
to assert that Association is not real football, as for the English
skater to label the International skater an acrobat or contortionist, or
for the International skater to call his detested English brother an
exponent of the ramrod school. Many flowers of speech bloomed in the
gardens of these controversialists, the more exotic and violently
coloured blossoms springing, I think, from certain skaters in the International style, who were admirably
industrious at one time in their denunciation of anyone who ventured to
skate in the English style. The present writer, for instance, who, poor
fool, thought he was amusing himself quietly in attempting unambitious
feats in English skating, without interfering with anybody, had an open
letter addressed to him in the _Engadine Post_, pointing out the
vileness and wickedness of his heretic ways; and a precious little book,
that now lies open before me, which did not attract as much attention as
its unconscious humour seems to warrant, informs us that the theories on
which English skating are based are “diametrically opposed to every
principle of nature, science and art, and at variance with the
unrestrained freedom of action and movement which prevails in every
other branch of athletic sport.” Probably the writer felt better after
that, for we have heard nothing of him since; while with regard to the
above-quoted criticism, the only comment that need be made is, that on
the same silly lines it would be reasonable to call lawn-tennis at
variance with unrestrained freedom of action and movement, because it is
not part of the game to slog the ball wildly out of court.

But of late this controversy has somewhat died down, the fact being that
no one with the smallest knowledge of the difficulties and beauties of
skating at all, in whichever of these two styles, ever joined in it,
since, whether in personal preference he was English or Continental, he
had sufficient acquaintance with skating matters to appreciate and
admire the excellence both of his own school and of that to which he
owed no allegiance. He saw also that the two schools had nothing to do
with each other, and instead of jeering at the other, contentedly
practised at the one he happened to prefer. Naturally, most Swiss
resorts tend to one style or the other; but at Davos, the original
cradle of the modern English style, the two schools flourish side by
side, as also they do at Mürren, one of the newly-opened Swiss centres.
There particularly--at Davos there is a separate English rink, mainly
occupied by English skaters--you may see the votaries of the different
schools of this now obsolete controversy cheek by jowl on the ice, and
lying down together, after a fall, like the lion and the lamb. At St.
Moritz, similarly, both styles are bloodlessly practised, though the
International style is the more popular; while Grindelwald is nowadays
exclusively International, after having been exclusively English. So,
too, is Wengen. On the other hand, at Villars, one of the largest
skating resorts in the country, there is scarcely an Internationalist to
be seen, and Château d’Oex, Montana, and Morgins are similarly almost
entirely English in their leanings. But without more enumeration it is
sufficient to say that both schools flourish exceedingly, and will
undoubtedly continue to do so, and nothing that anybody says will
detract from the prosperity of either.

Now skating, in both these styles, is largely a matter of form, and
herein it differs from nearly every other sport. It does not suffice in
skating, whether you are English or Internationalist, to _do_ certain
things, to cut threes, to execute rocking-turns, or loops or
back-brackets. All these things have to be done in the manner prescribed
by the Vedas, so to speak, of your school. Without doubt there is reason
at the base of these methods, for it is clear that if, in a combined
figure, four English skaters were allowed to fly into their centre on a back edge with their unemployed
leg waving, and there execute a rocker, there would immediately be a
heap of mangled bodies on the ice, a result which is not recognised as
being among the objects of combined skating; and similarly, in the
International style, the graceful poses of arm and leg, which ignorant
English skaters look upon as mere display, are designed to assist the
movement. But in all other games (and this is where skating differs from
them all) the point is to achieve a certain object, and the achievement
of that object, however attained, renders the achiever a notable
performer if he consistently attains it. The golfer, for instance, who
consistently drives a long straight ball, puts his mashie shot near the
hole, and generally putts out, is a magnificent golfer, in whatever
manner or style he executes these tyrannously difficult feats. There are
a hundred and a hundred hundred styles and modes of putting, and they
are all good, provided only they enable the putter to hole his ball. At
cricket, similarly, a man may bowl fast or slow with any sort of break,
and with any sort of action (provided his shirt sleeve is not wantonly
flapping), and he is a good bowler if only he gets wickets cheaply. But
at skating the prescribed thing has to be done in the prescribed manner,
and the prescriptions of the English school are, broadly speaking, all
of them diametrically opposed to the principles of the International
school. In the English style the employed leg (_i.e._ the one which for
the moment is being skated on) must be straight; in the International
style it must be bent. In the English style the unemployed leg must be
close to the other, and hang beside it, loosely and easily; in the
International, wherever the exigencies of the movement demand that it
should be, it must at any rate never be there. In English the arms must
not be spread and swung abroad to assist the movement, but must be
carried inactively by the side, whereas in International, as long as the
skate moves the arms must be engaged on their assigned activity. In both
schools, in fact, every movement must be executed in a given way, but in
no case is there the smallest resemblance between those ways, though
both should result in clean edges and clean turns executed at defined
places.

It is not my intention to give here a manual of English skating,
beginning with instruction to beginners and ending with timorous hints
to experts, but any book on Winter Sports would necessarily be
incomplete unless it babbled to some considerable extent about skating,
which, without doubt, is the sport in pursuit of which the large
majority of English folk visit the High Alps in winter. From whatever
cause, this slippery art exercises a unique spell over the able-bodied
and athletic section of Anglo-Saxon mankind. It may be that this is
partly accounted for by the comparative rarity of the occasions on which
we can skate, owing to our Gulf-Stream-beridden and generally
pestilential climate, and it is sufficient that some puddle-place in a
village green should be half-frozen to cause the majority, not only of
youth but of sedate men and women, to hurry down to the spot, and there
slide about on both feet with staggerings and frequent falls and the
ever-present possibility of occasional immersions. But the rarity of
even half-frozen puddles in England does not wholly account for the
transcendent spell: there is something in the quality of motion which
is started by a stroke of the tense muscles, and then continues of its
own accord, without effort or friction, until the impetus is exhausted,
that appeals to our unwinged race, who must otherwise keep putting foot
before foot to get anywhere. The sensation itself is exquisite, and the
sensation is rendered more precious by the fact that from the days when
the tyro slides cautiously forward on both feet, to the days when,
having become a master in his art, he executes back-counters at the
centre in a combined figure, there is always a slight uncertainty as to
what is going to happen next. The tyro rejoicing in the unaccustomed
method of progress is conscious of a pleasing terror as to whether he
will not fall flat down, and glows with callow raptures all the time
that he does not; while the finest skater who ever lived, will never be
quite sure that he will flick out his back-counter cleanly and
unswervingly. We can all walk pretty perfectly--at least, there is no
pleasing terror that we may be going to fall down--but none of us at our
respective levels as artists in skating can skate pretty perfectly. We
can only skate moderately well, considering how well we can skate. And
the joy of it! The unreasoning, delirious joy of the beginner who for
the first time feels his outside edge bite the ice, and, no less, the
secret elation of the finest performers in the world, when they execute
their back-counter close to the centre, at high speed, and without the
semblance of flatness in the edge! And even if any of us was so
proficient as to perform such a feat with absolute certainty, there is
no doubt whatever that we should find some further feat that would put
us back into the dignified ranks of stragglers again. And the same
holds good with regard to International skating: at least if there is
any among those delightful artists who will execute the Hugel star first
on one foot and then on the other without a pleasing anxiety gnawing at
his heart, I should very much like to know his name and black his boots
for him.

To go more into detail with regard to the manner and style of these
antipodal twins, we will take first the twin known as English skating.
This falls into two broad classes, namely, single skating and that which
is the cream and essence of English skating, combined skating. A further
development of combined skating, namely, combined hand-in-hand skating,
has not long ago been undergoing a successful evolution, under the
auspices chiefly of Miss Cannan, Lord Doneraile and Mr. N. G. Thompson.
Without doubt it holds many charming possibilities, and very likely
there is a great future before it, but owing to right of primogeniture
we will first consider the two elder branches. In both the technique, so
to speak, is the same. The object is to skate fast on large bold edges,
to make turns of all sorts and changes of edge cleanly and without
effort, and to skate all these turns and edges in a particular and
prescribed manner.

The first consideration, therefore, is the manner. The stroke must be
taken, _i.e._ impetus must be set up, not with a push of our skate-toe
into the ice, but from the inside edge of the skate blade. The reason is
obvious, for if a skater thrusts his sharp skate-toe into the ice he
will make a hole in it, and damage the ice. That is sufficient: I think
there are probably four or five other reasons, which in a general and
unspecialised treatise like this need not be gone into.

The skater having got his impetus by leaning against the inside edge of
one skate, launches himself on the other. Now there are two edges to a
skate, namely, the inside and the outside. There is also the flat base
of the skate. Both theoretically and practically, he never uses the flat
of the skate in his actual progress. When he turns, whether the turn is
a three-turn or a rocker, or a counter or a bracket, he comes up to the
flat for a moment, but instantly leaves it again. He progresses on one
edge, the inside, or on the other edge, the outside. And while he
progresses, he must progress in the prescribed manner. And the
prescription is this:

I. _His head must be turned in the direction of his progress, whether he
is progressing forwards or backwards._ Again common-sense is at the base
of this rule. For if his head is turned in the direction of his
progress, he is looking, unless unfortunately blind, where he is going.
This avoids trouble to himself, if there are holes in the ice, and
trouble to other people if there are other people on the ice.

II. _He must be standing erect with his shoulders and body sideways to
the direction of his curve, not facing square down it._ In other words,
he must, among other things, be travelling not further forward than on
the middle of his skate, otherwise he will not be standing erect, but
leaning forward. This attitude is that which is referred to, in the
humorous book I have already quoted, as characteristic of the ramrod
school. But the author, in his blissful ignorance of skating matters, is
not aware that it is impossible to execute a long smooth circumference
of curve if you progress on the forepart of your skate. If you are on
the forepart of the skate, you must be leaning forward, and no one of
known anatomy can lean forward and execute a long smooth edge. The
balance is unsteady, and the edge wobbles. Commonsense, then, again
endorses this rule. In order to be steady on a long edge, your balance
must be of the established order. You must be upright, and travelling
without muscular effort to retain your position. This is only attained
by travelling on the middle or the aft part of the skate. For nobody can
stand still on their toes. But standing on the middle part of the foot
or with the weight on the heel it is perfectly easy to do so. But when
this humorous author (whom I drag out of his obscurity for the last
time) calls this the ramrod school, he proves himself ignorant of the
first principles of English skating, or perhaps has only observed
himself in some mirror at Prince’s Club attempting to assume the correct
attitude himself. As a matter of fact, the proper attitude of the skater
in the English style is exactly that of a man who is well made and
master of his limbs standing still with the weight chiefly on one foot.
While skating, it is true, the weight is entirely on one foot, and the
performer is moving, and not standing still. But the pose necessary to
smooth and swift progression is exactly that. It no more resembles a
ramrod, when decently done, as every good English skater does it, than
it resembles a coal-scuttle or a pince-nez, or what you will.

III. _The unemployed leg_, i.e. _the leg of the foot which is not
skating, must hang close to the employed leg_. Again the reason is
obvious. If four persons came into their centre with a waving
unemployed leg, they would hit each other. Also, if the unemployed leg
is put out behind, the skater must lean forward in order to counteract
its weight. He will then tend to skate on the forepart of his skate. In
a series of long edges this attitude is impossible to maintain except by
effort. Nobody could skate for a quarter of an hour in combined skating,
accurately and largely on such a principle.

IV. _The arms must hang by the side, and be carried loosely easily,
close to the body._ Again the explanation is obvious. There is no need
for their flying abroad, since a long edge is most easily accomplished
with the limbs and body in rest after the stroke, and these long smooth
edges are part and parcel of English skating: it is founded on them.
English skating postulates so perfect a balance, travelling on the
middle of the skates, that it chooses (this is the reason for the rule)
not to let that balance be assisted by the added or subtracted weight of
a correcting arm. It says (this is what it comes to) that you must be so
firm on your travelling root, so to speak, of balance, that you dispense
with all adjustments of weight. The weight has to be practically
perfectly adjusted. There must be no adjustments adventitiously
obtained.

Now these four rules are at the base of English skating. If you happen
to play a game, you conform to the rules, and you do not argue, for
instance, when you are playing cricket, whether you should be given out,
when quite clearly you have been caught at the wicket. If you are at all
sensible, or in any way like cricket, you pocket your duck’s egg and
retire. Superb strokes may be made at cricket, which nevertheless are
fatal to the striker. Superb attitudes, similarly, may be made in the
International style, which are quite completely wrong. They may be
supremely statuesque, but they are not skating. The case is exactly the
same with the English style. Certain canons have been laid down, all of
which seem to be necessary to the attainment of excellence. It is no
doubt possible to skate charming “threes to a centre” doing everything
quite wrong from beginning to end. But if you choose to adopt a style,
you must conform to the rules of that style. Similarly, it is quite
possible to skate the same “threes to a centre” in the International
style, which shall leave the same mark on the ice (though the skating of
them broke every possible rule) as the most finished performer could
leave there. But who would not applaud the International judge who
ruthlessly ploughed such a candidate? He has not kept the rules, which
in contradistinction to other games prescribe not only what the object
in view is, but the manner in which the performance is to take place.
But this manner, we venture to point out, has not been laid down in an
arbitrary way: it is the manner, both in International skating and in
English alike, in which the feats demanded can alone be properly
performed.

Now if the skater will take the trouble to conform to the four rules
given above, he will find that even at the outset of his career there is
great fun in store for him. Should he conform to them completely, when
the complication of turns is added, he will quite certainly find that
there is a championship, if he cares for that, in store for him also.
The rules were not negligently made; indeed they were never made at all,
but are simply the condensed experience of the best skaters, the methods
by which the fittest survived. And the fittest did, and always will do,
that which is recorded in these rules, and the ensuing complications,
even the most complicated of them, are comparatively easy to those who
can maintain the proper travelling position. But nobody who cannot hold
a long firm edge, for which the proper travelling position is essential,
need ever trouble his dreams with the notion of becoming a good skater.
And no one’s edges approach perfection, if he cannot traverse, on
backward and forward edges, outside and inside alike, a distance of at
least a hundred yards, given that the ice is reasonably good, without
stirring from the attitude he has taken up after his stroke. A really
fine skater will traverse much more, and be still as a rock throughout
his travel; but no good skater will be so unsteady that he will not
easily traverse that. In his actual skating he will, probably, never be
called upon to make so lengthy an edge, but its accomplishment should
present no difficulty to him, if he aspires to be a fair performer. Even
as the pianist, when performing, is not called upon to play simple
scales with both hands, so the skater will not be called upon, in his
combined figure, to skate for a hundred yards on one edge. But both
pianist and skater ought to find no difficulty at all in executing these
simple feats.

The beginner is advised to get a fair mastery of all the edges before he
begins to attack the fortress of the turns. He should be able to
progress steadily and smoothly both on the outside edge and the inside
edge forward, and to make some progress also on the back edges, namely,
outside back and inside back. This last is far the most difficult of the
edges, and it will be a long time before he is able to take fast bold
strokes on it. But he should have some acquaintance with it before he
attempts to make the turns that necessitate its employment, and be able
to hold it in the correct position. He can then set about turns and
changes of edge, which all imply correct travelling.

Now there are four groups of turns, common both to the English and
International styles, each group of which contains four turns to be
executed on each foot. Altogether, therefore, there are sixteen turns to
be learned which employ each foot singly. These with the four edges,
executed in the prescribed manner, form the material of the art. These
turns are common both to English and International skating,